# DEND Project - Data Warehouse

Instructor: David Drummond, Judit Lantos

Offered By: [udacity.com][1]

Student: Rob Straker

## Introduction
This repo contains Python files and configuration files for the fourth project, *Data Lake*, for the Data Engineering Nanodegree program offered through Udacity. 

The purpose of this project is to apply what you've learned on Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. You'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.

## Database Purpose
#### Background
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

#### Database
The primary purpose of this S3 database is to meet Sparkify's goal of moving their data warehouse to a data lake. However, the new database also needs to allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

## Repo Files
#### Project Datasets
1. **Song Dataset**
    - The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. 
    - For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
        - song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
        - song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
2. **Log Dataset**
    - The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.
    - The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
        - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
        - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

#### Project Files
In addition to the data files, this project repo includes four files:
1. **dl.cfg** contains your AWS credentials.
2. **etl.py** reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3.
3. **etl_local_data.ipynb** contains code from etl.py and additional scripts to test etl.py.
4. **README.md** (this file) provides discussion on your process and decisions.

## Project Completion
Following are some instructions on running the Python scripts and completing the project:
1. **Get Started**
    - To get started with the project, go to the project workspace, where you'll find the project template. You can work on your project with a smaller dataset found in the workspace, and then move on to the bigger dataset on AWS.
    - Alternatively, you can download the template files in the Resources tab in the classroom and work on this project on your local computer.
2. **Build ETL Pipeline**
    - Implement the logic in etl.py to load, transform, and extract data from S3 to schema tables on EMR.
    - Test by running etl.py using local data in the workspace.
    - Delete your EMR cluster when finished.
3. **Document Process** Do the following steps in your README.md file.
    - Discuss the purpose of this database in context of the startup, Sparkify, and their analytical goals.
    - State and justify your database schema design and ETL pipeline.
    - [Optional] Provide example queries and results for song play analysis.

## Database Design
#### Database Schema
A star schema, optimized for queries on song play analysis, was created using the song and log datasets. This schema includes the following tables:
1. **Fact Table**
    - songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
        - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
2. **Dimension Tables**
    - users - users in the app
        - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
    - songs - songs in music database
        - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
    - artists - artists in music database
        - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
    - time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
        - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

The star schema design, one of the most widely-used schemas in the industry, is also the simplest style of data mart schema. It was selected for Sparkify because, compared to other potential choices (e.g. Snowflake Schema):
1. It is more effective at handling simplified queries. As Sparkify is just beginning to explore and understand their user activity dataset, their needs are basic, as demonstrated by their initial request to learn what songs users are listening to. 
2. It supports fast aggregations. When simple queries are used, performance can be improved, which is important given a potential large dataset of historical user activity from Sparkify's music streaming app.
3. It supports simplified reporting. Business reporting logic, such as period-over-period and as-of reporting, is generally much simpler for the star schema.

#### ETL Pipeline
The ETL pipeline (**E**xtract, **T**ransform, **L**oad) is designed to:
- Connect to the two Sparkify S3 databases (**Song Dataset** and **Log Dataset**, as described above).
- Extract, transform, and load the ```log_data``` and ```song_data``` from these databases into the five tables of the database star schema: the fact table (*songplays*) and the four dimension tables (*users*, *songs*, *artists*, and *time*).

This pipeline is simple and practical, enabling the desired query (what songs are users listening to) as well as many other simple queries of the user activity datasets.


[//]: # (Links Section)
[1]:https://www.udacity.com