# DEND Project - Data Modeling with Postgres

Instructor: Amanda Moran

Offered By: [udacity.com][1]

Student: Rob Straker

## Introduction
This repo contains Python files, Jupyter notebooks, and sample data for the first project, *Data Modeling with Postgres*, for the Data Engineering Nanodegree program offered through Udacity. 

The purpose of this project is to model user activity data to create a database and ETL pipeline in Postgres for a music streaming app. In order to complete this project:
- Fact and dimension tables will be defined for a star schema for a particular analytic focus. 
- An ETL pipeline will be written that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python an SQL.

## Database Purpose
#### Background
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. The engineer's role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. The engineer will be able to test their database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to them by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare their results with the analytics team's expected results.

#### Database
The primary purpose of this Postgres database is to meet Sparkify's stated data analysis goal: to enable queries of songs that their streaming app users are listening to. However, they currently have no easy way to query any of the song and user activity generated by their music streaming app. Therefore, it would also be prudent to enable more general queries that allow Sparkify to better understand other aspects of their user's activity.

## Repo Files
#### Project Datasets
1. **Song Dataset**
    - The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. 
    - For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
        - song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
        - song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
2. **Log Dataset**
    - The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.
    - The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. 
    - For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
        - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
        - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

#### Project Files
In addition to the data files, this project repo includes six files:
1. **test.ipynb** displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.
2. **create_tables.py** drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
3. **etl.ipyn**b reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
4. **etl.py** reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.
5. **sql_queries.py** contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.
6. **README.md** (this file) provides discussion on the project.

## Project Completion
Following are some instructions on running the Python scripts and completing the project:
1. **Create Tables**
    - Write CREATE statements in sql_queries.py to create each table.
    - Write DROP statements in sql_queries.py to drop each table if it exists.
    - Run create_tables.py to create your database and tables.
    - Run test.ipynb to confirm the creation of your tables with the correct columns. Make sure to click "Restart kernel" to close the connection to the database after running this notebook.
2. **Build ETL Processes**
    - Follow instructions in the etl.ipynb notebook to develop ETL processes for each table. At the end of each table section, or at the end of the notebook, run test.ipynb to confirm that records were successfully inserted into each table. Remember to rerun create_tables.py to reset your tables before each time you run this notebook.
3. **Build ETL Pipeline**
    - Use what you've completed in etl.ipynb to complete etl.py, where you'll process the entire datasets. Remember to run create_tables.py before running etl.py to reset your tables. Run test.ipynb to confirm your records were successfully inserted into each table.

## Database Design
#### Database Schema
A star schema, optimized for queries on song play analysis, was created using the song and log datasets. This schema includes the following tables:
1. **Fact Table**
    - songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
        - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
2. **Dimension Tables**
    - users - users in the app
        - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
    - songs - songs in music database
        - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
    - artists - artists in music database
        - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
    - time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
        - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

The star schema design, one of the most widely-used schemas in the industry, is also the simplest style of data mart schema. It was selected for Sparkify because, compared to other potential choices (e.g. Snowflake Schema):
1. It is more effective at handling simplified queries. As Sparkify is just beginning to explore and understand their user activity dataset, their needs are basic, as demonstrated by their initial request to learn what songs users are listening to. 
2. It supports fast aggregations. When simple queries are used, performance can be improved, which is important given a potential large dataset of historical user activity from Sparkify's music streaming app.
3. It supports simplified reporting. Business reporting logic, such as period-over-period and as-of reporting, is generally much simpler for the star schema.

#### ETL Pipeline
The ETL pipeline (**E**xtract, **T**ransform, **L**oad) is designed to:
- Connect to the two Sparkify databases (**Song Dataset** and **Log Dataset**, as described above).
- Extract and process the ```log_data``` and ```song_data``` from these databases.
- Load data into the five tables of the database star schema: the fact table (*songplays*) and the four dimension tables (*users*, *songs*, *artists*, and *time*).

This pipeline is simple and practical, enabling the desired query (what songs are users listening to) as well as many other simple queries of the user activity datasets.


[//]: # (Links Section)
[1]:https://www.udacity.com