# DEND Project - Data Warehouse

Instructor: Sameh El-Ansary, Juno Lee

Offered By: [udacity.com][1]

Student: Rob Straker

## Introduction
This repo contains Python files and configuration files for the third project, *Data Warehouse*, for the Data Engineering Nanodegree program offered through Udacity. 

The purpose of this project is to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift for a music streaming app, leveraging our knowledge of data warehouses and AWS. In order to complete the project:
- Data will be loaded from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
- SQL statements will be executed that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.

## Database Purpose
#### Background
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

#### Database
The primary purpose of this Redshift database is to meet Sparkify's goal of moving their processes and data onto the cloud. However, the new database also needs to drive listener insights by supporting queries of songs that their streaming app users are listening to. 

## Repo Files
#### Project Datasets
1. **Song Dataset**
    - The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. 
    - For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
        - song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
        - song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
2. **Log Dataset**
    - The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.
    - The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
        - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
        - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

#### Project Files
In addition to the data files, this project repo includes six files:
1. **dwh.cfg** is where you will add redshift database and IAM role information.
2. **create_tables.py** is where you'll create your fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.
3. **etl.py** is where you'll load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into your analytics tables on Redshift.
4. **sql_queries.py** is where you'll define you SQL statements, which will be imported into the two other files above.
5. **README.md** (this file) is where you'll provide discussion on your process and decisions for this ETL pipeline.

## Project Completion
Following are some instructions on running the Python scripts and completing the project:
1. **Create Table Schemas**
    - Design schemas for your fact and dimension tables
    - Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
    - Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables
    - Write SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of create_tables.py if the tables already exist. This way, you can run create_tables.py whenever you want to reset your database and test your ETL pipeline.
    - Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
    - Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.
    - Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in your redshift database. You can use
    - Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.
2. **Build ETL Pipeline**
    - Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
    - Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
    - Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on your Redshift database to compare your results with the expected results.
    - Delete your redshift cluster when finished.
3. **Document Process** Do the following steps in your README.md file.
    - Discuss the purpose of this database in context of the startup, Sparkify, and their analytical goals.
    - State and justify your database schema design and ETL pipeline.
    - [Optional] Provide example queries and results for song play analysis.

## Database Design
#### Database Schema
A star schema, optimized for queries on song play analysis, was created using the song and log datasets. This schema includes the following tables:
1. **Fact Table**
    - songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
        - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
2. **Dimension Tables**
    - users - users in the app
        - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
    - songs - songs in music database
        - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
    - artists - artists in music database
        - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
    - time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
        - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

The star schema design, one of the most widely-used schemas in the industry, is also the simplest style of data mart schema. It was selected for Sparkify because, compared to other potential choices (e.g. Snowflake Schema):
1. It is more effective at handling simplified queries. As Sparkify is just beginning to explore and understand their user activity dataset, their needs are basic, as demonstrated by their initial request to learn what songs users are listening to. 
2. It supports fast aggregations. When simple queries are used, performance can be improved, which is important given a potential large dataset of historical user activity from Sparkify's music streaming app.
3. It supports simplified reporting. Business reporting logic, such as period-over-period and as-of reporting, is generally much simpler for the star schema.

#### ETL Pipeline
The ETL pipeline (**E**xtract, **T**ransform, **L**oad) is designed to:
- Connect to the two Sparkify Redshift databases (**Song Dataset** and **Log Dataset**, as described above).
- Extract and load the ```log_data``` and ```song_data``` from these databases into staging tables.
- Transforms and loads data from these staging tables into the five tables of the database star schema: the fact table (*songplays*) and the four dimension tables (*users*, *songs*, *artists*, and *time*).

This pipeline is simple and practical, enabling the desired query (what songs are users listening to) as well as many other simple queries of the user activity datasets.


[//]: # (Links Section)
[1]:https://www.udacity.com